Okay, welcome everybody. This is the
town of Andover Board of Finance
meeting, the regular meeting, Wednesday,
April 23rd,
2025. Uh we'll call the meeting to order
and recite the pledge of allegiance. I
pledge allegiance to the flag of United
States, United States of America to the
stands, one
nation under God, indivisible with
liberty, liberty and justice for all.
Okay, thank you. Um, first order of
business is public speak. I do not see
any members of the public present.
So, I guess we will move on to item
three, which is changes and additions to
the
agenda. Uh, does anybody have any
proposed changes or additions to the
agenda?
I don't this time. I'm all set. Okay.
All right. Well, hearing none, we'll
move on to the town administrators
report. So, Eric, I see you included
quite a bit of stuff in the packet. Um,
you also had Kate forward some things
this morning about the legislative
activity which I'm sure we'll talk about
under that topic. Um, I haven't had a
chance to read through all some of it.
Uh, do you want to give us a summary?
Sure. Uh,
so you all have it in your packet. Um,
the the biggest thing we've had to deal
with lately is the fact that the town
did get a full-blown OSHA inspection of
town buildings.
um they've inspected public works
before, but they've never inspected any
of the other public buildings. So, uh
our initial bill for corrective actions
is around
$26,000 um which is a big chunk of the
building maintenance fund, but um
ultimately we don't really have any
choice. Um no idea what our initial
rounds of fines are going to be for
this. Uh the per violation fine right
now for pretty much all violations is up
to
$16,500 each. So absolute worst case
scenario, you know, we'd be at around
$300,000 in fines. Seems highly unlikely
we're going to be anywhere near that.
Um, but I would expect that they're
going to come back with an initial fine
proposal of, you know, 50 to
$70,000. Um, of
which we will be able to demonstrate
that we have corrected every single
issue that they've identified uh, prior
to our follow-on meeting. Um, and
judging by what other towns have done,
my guess is we're going to get the total
fine violations for the town down to
somewhere around a $15,000 fine. Um,
which we'll handle from
contingency. Um, but I could be wildly
off uh high or low on that number. Um,
so questions on that. Yeah. What what
kind of what kind of violations did we
end up with?
Sounds like a lot.
So, no, that that's actually not a lot.
Um, crazy as it sounds. So, in the town
hall in the library, the majority of the
violations were for uh overusing
extension cords because frankly we Yeah,
that'll do it. Yeah. in a lot of
offices. Um, fortunately, we didn't have
any heaters, but we did have several
things like microwaves plugged into uh
power strips. Um, you know, and
basically some of those I don't know
whether they're going to be violations
or not because they actually take the
name plates of everything plugged into
the power strip and go back and see
whether we're over the load rating of
that particular power strip.
Um, so we're we're clearly going to get
some uh they did identify one of our
emergency exit lights that was not
functional.
Um, so that one's a a definite
violation. Um, and we got a violation
for the town clerk's office being too
cluttered. Um, and that is considered an
OSHA violation. Um, in addition to one
of the closets, uh, also in town clerk's
office.
Eric, if I could ask a question. I know
that in the town that I work with, we
have a walkth through by our fire
department and our fire marshall that
will point out those exact things. I
mean, it's it's interesting to me that
in such a small town like this and how
our fire department people are right
there that we don't have someone walk
through in a preliminary way because we
have an inspection every year at the
school that I work in. And there are
those certain things like that like too
many plugs, you know, too many things
plugged into a, you know, the cord like
you said. So, we're preemptive on that
all the time. It's kind of shocking to
me that we would let it get to the point
that OSHA comes in so that the town's
going to get
fined. It sounds like
OSHA's gonna anytime OSHA walks into a
workplace, you're going to get some
fines because they're going to keep
going till they find something wrong.
They have to justify their salary,
right? Is is OSHA once a year? I I'm
just trying to see how this would happen
because those are whenever we hear we're
going to have an ex, you know, an
inspection right away. I would look
around my office and say, is it
cluttered? Do I have, you know, we know
not to plug things in? So,
yeah. Just trying to see. It's just
freezing constantly. I can't even hear
what's going on. As far as I know, um,
the only production the town's ever done
and I don't know what town, we can hear
you. Can you have our town the fire
department going on? You're not muted.
Can you mute yourself? You're having a
second conversation. Okay. Thanks.
So, um, I'm sorry. So, Eric, I didn't
hear what you had. So, public works was
well prepared for an inspection because
that's the only thing that they've ever
really inspected in the past. Um, the
town hall and the library were uh less
prepared. Um,
so it's not a once a year thing or
something like that that you're, you
know, you're going to be, it just could
be whenever.
As far as I know, the municipal
buildings up to now have not ever gotten
inspected. Oh, okay. Um, so, you know,
public works is is we've spent an
enormous amount of money in public works
over the last five years walking working
off all the problems they have. Um, and
public works was not cited for anything
physical. they, you know, I think we're
going to end up getting cited on a
couple of
procedures that, you know, they think
probably we're at the threshold where we
need to do. Um, and I think we're going
to get cited because our eyewash station
doesn't have enough capacity to meet new
federal OSHA
rules.
Um, the one that Thank you. No, I mean,
sorry. I I guess it sounds like you
didn't We never know when it's going to
happen. It hasn't happened in the town
hall very often, so they're not prepared
for that.
Yeah. No, we're not on any kind of
regular OSHA inspection schedule. Yeah.
I didn't think anyone was right. I
thought it was more like a fire thing
first and then No, thank you for
explaining the process.
Eric, can I just ask you a quick
question about it? Do you have your full
report back? We do not. Okay. All right.
Well, I mean, I went through one that
was very minor when I was operating cool
and you know, I got the inspection back
and I just very bluntly answered each
and every question, told them how I was
going to identify how to fix it and they
were fine. So, it is a pain, but it's
going to be okay. I'm sure it's nothing,
you know, that anybody did. you're just
going to randomly have them. Yeah. The
the problem is if you have a lot of you
have a lot of violations, they'll tend
to make return visits. So, be ready. I
you know, I I did have that question for
the inspector about where we stacked up
and he actually said we were one of the
best towns he had inspected. We were way
on, you know, we got almost nothing on
the areas that they
normally, you know, ding towns. I mean,
uh, the transfer station, um, had one,
uh, one lower railing on one dumpster
wasn't there. Um, but the upper railing
was. We said he wouldn't cite us for
that. You know, he's
like, you know, you could maybe make the
argument that we have too much clutter
in our oil collection area. Um but we're
we're we actually got through the areas
where most towns get hammered pretty
close to unscathed. Yeah.
The only thing where we were very
fortunate in that when they because the
one thing they always do with public
works is say, "Okay, show us all your
SDS sheets." and they go randomly find
whatever chemicals they can, you know,
and they go back and look at the book
and say, "Do you have the SDS sheets?"
Yes. Yeah. Where they failed was or
where
they they weren't, you know, fully
compliant is they didn't have
um they hadn't formalized training for
all employees on how to read SDS sheets,
which is a requirement. That was, you
know, that was definitely an issue
um on our part. And uh they will
probably get cited for a trip hazard in
the old animal control facility because
the old animal control facility was
built with a gutter in it so dog urine
and water can run out to the drain.
um you know and because they're not
using it as an animal control facility
now they have an abrupt uh change of
plane in a room even though it's up
against a fence. So I think we're going
to get hit with that one. Um
um so overall I'm not super concerned. I
mean, my goal is to be really
proactive and, you know, when we get to
the So, we should have the formal report
back sometime either late this week or
early next week with the intention of
setting up a follow-on appointment um in
a week or so. And then the only real
question is
uh I want to be able to document to him
that everything that was pointed out on
the walkth through and either myself or
Jay was with them all of the two days
you know of the inspection that we've
addressed every single thing that he
identified um both as a violation and as
a you know you ought to consider this.
So that's kind of been my approach.
Right. Right. You learn from it. Yep.
Louise, you had your hand up earlier.
Was curious, did they go to the
community center? They did not. Um,
okay. Don't know why. I think it's a new
enough building. It's not on their list
of buildings, which is why they didn't
um, you know. Do you think they do you
think they would have found anything?
No, actually I think the community
center
is is and I you know we walked through
it afterward, you know, and looked at
everything they
identified as violations in our regular
buildings and those just aren't really
present there. Um yeah, you know, so
that's that. Too new. Yep. Okay. Any
other questions on that topic or or did
you have more? No, I just wanted to
follow up. I thought this was a yearly
thing. I didn't understand that Andover
wasn't used to this kind of thing. So,
that's where my line of questioning came
from. We're we have them all the time.
So, we're not OSHA maybe per se, but
like safety inspections. Yeah. So, I
think it's old hat. So when he said
there might be up if everything got
cited it could be $300,000 worth of
fines or and like Kim had mentioned I
really feel like you can just what I've
seen from experience is that as long as
you have a corrective action to address
it usually if this was like the first
time Andover's been subjected to it. Um,
yeah, that's all I wanted to say. That's
where my line of question. I didn't
realize it's something very new. You
know, 25 years running manufacturing
plants. I'm going to knock on wood real
hard. I've never had an ocean
inspection.
Yeah, it's not very common. I mean, we
do try to address things, but So, yeah.
And what what I didn't realize is that
uh Khan OSHA which is the one that
inspected us
subcontracts OSHA
subcontracts with Khan OSHA to inspect
uh municipal buildings and uh state
buildings. But was what was interesting
is I asked him if they needed to get
into the uh resident state troopers
office because that was a separate key
which I don't have and his comment was
no the resident state trooper is a state
uh is considered that room is considered
a an agency of the state not the town
and if we inspected that it would be
some other time um when we're doing for
instance all the resident state
troopers. So, I thought that was um
interesting. Um
does that have any impact at all on the
insurance of the
buildings like liability insurance or
anything like that? I don't think so.
Probably not. It's probably driven more
by claim history. Although the gut
insurance people want to think better,
but I mean I have been my through this,
you know, they wouldn't love it if they
found out about it, but it's, you know,
fines aren't a covered loss. Like you're
testifying for violations, not for an
accident. So an insurance company would
probably not care too much. But I assume
if there were egregious violations found
that an insurance company was really on
the ball, you know, anything they
thought that would create a
hazard. Not great. But I don't know. I'm
not on the underwriting side.
Right. And and we certainly didn't have
anything that falls in the category of a
willful violation. Um which is certainly
the most serious and carries with it.
Yeah. Recurring. Um, so I I worked for a
company actually that uh got an OSHA
inspection and got a willful violation.
Um, I wasn't there during the
inspection. Um, but unfortunately what
happened is in front of we changed over
the main electrical service in the
building. Um, and because of that, we
had a essentially a 48 inch clearance
requirement in front of the main service
panels. Um, and I taped it off on the
floor and I posted right on the panels.
Nothing goes in this spot. Nothing
within 42 in. And the pressman had piled
it full of paper. Um, and OSHA walked
in. And that was a willful violation.
that was a 32 grand fine um that they
did not were not able to bargain down.
Um, so we didn't have anything
egregious. Um, you know, so, and I just
want to say too, real quick, Eric, um,
when you get your report and you get out
through all this and everything, let
your everybody know in the town who
works with you what the violations were
and what they can't do so that they
don't do this stuff and get us in
trouble again.
No, no, I I I I have already done that
with all the employees based on the
preliminary results and talked about
what could and couldn't happen.
Um, you know, clutter has been one of my
pet peeves for a while. Um, and frankly
been kind of ignored. Um, but you know,
um, they'll listen to OSHA, so that's
good. Um, anyway, that's all I got for
that. Uh, the Bunker Hill project is,
uh, had about a 3-w weekek hiccup
because our, uh, unfortunately the,
uh, four utility companies, which is
Frontier, Eversource,
uh, the cable company, and the fiber
provider, uh, the backbone provider.
um really delayed
uh in in sw switching out the service to
the new polls on the new side. So um I
was eventually it was mostly the fault
of Frontier. Um and eventually I used
Steve Weir, our legislator, as well as
uh filing a direct claim with with PURA
um to get them to actually comply. But
it did delay things about 3 weeks.
shouldn't have any cost implications to
the town. It's more an annoyance. Um,
what I want to let you know, and we'll
talk about it later, kind of at the end
of my report, I threw a little
spreadsheet in there of what we've paid
them so far for that project, and I just
want to keep you up to date on that.
Uh the board of selectmen finally oh I
am resubmitting a request for
congressional funding that was not uh
through the US Senate. Um it was not uh
approved last year even though it made
it through the Senate Appropriations
Commission and it was a highly ranked
project. So in an ordinary year it would
have been funded but last year the
Congress
uh didn't approve any appropriations and
the government is moving under a
continuous resolution not a budget. So
hopefully uh collectively they get their
act together um and it will get funded
this coming year. Unfortunately, they
only gave me seven days to resubmit. So,
I'm not real happy about that. Um
because I got
my my butt to the wall trying to get all
the contractors to requote uh given that
a year's gone by and copper prices have
gone through the roof. So, that's
chewing up a bit of my time right now.
Liz, did you have a question?
Okay. No, no. I was just muting because
I hear little children crying in the
background. So, no good. Got it. Um, so
the destratification fans that were
going in the gym, those were finally
installed uh last week when school was
out of session. Um, so that was money
that was already budgeted in the
building maintenance fund. I do have a
question about that. I do have a
question about that. How are they? I had
heard that they're wicked loud. Are they
are people happy about them? Do you
know? I don't know. Oh, you don't know?
I talked to the school. Okay. I don't
know who's on
I mean, these are designed for a
warehouse,
so they're not designed for a gymnasium.
Um,
you know, but, uh, you know, it also
depends on they have nine levels, so
it's not like you don't have to run them
at max either. Um, if you run them at
max, I think they're they're going to be
pretty loud.
Okay. I was just curious if you had
experienced it at all.
Yeah. No, I mean, I was in there when we
ran them all up to Max. Um,
you know, I'm pretty deaf, so it didn't
bother me. Um, but maybe if you had a
gym class in there and you were trying
to give instruction, it would be a
problem. Um, okay. Probably quieter than
48 year olds.
quieter than one 8-year-old.
Um, so the last thing is the board of
selectmen approved expending
uh up to $20,000 out of the building
maintenance fund for the fire department
cabinet and countertop upgrade. So, uh,
yeah, that will be coming fairly soon.
Um, we also submitted a grant for the
replacement for the senior
transportation van. Um, generally it
takes about a year before we even know
whether we got the grant or not. Um, if
we do it, yeah, it's kind of a state
grant, but it's also passed through
federal money. So, it's anybody's guess
right now. Um and the other thing I find
very curious is that the state still on
the books is saying that uh all state
vehicles and they want all municipal
vehicles including school buses
converted to
electric but
but the grant funding doesn't list an
electric vehicle as an option. So it's
like on the one hand they're telling us
we're still supposed to be on track to
do this. on another hand, you can't
grant fund for it. So anyway, that's
just a a weirdness in uh town or state
government. Um that would require a 20%
match from the town. Um I did get the
board of selectmen to authorize me to
submit the grant because I'm not
authorized to submit any grant that
requires a uh town match. Um like I
said, we will know sometime next spring.
um if we get it and probably we would
get it in the next budget cycle, not you
know
um so we would have to figure out where
that 20% would come and it would have to
go to town meeting under the current
charter rules to approve anyway. Um not
for me to apply for the grant but for
the town to actually accept it. So
that's the thing on that. Um, the other
thing that threw me for a little bit of
a loop is we had a meeting for the
Longill Road bridge
replacement. Um, so you
know, we uh had an the initial public
hearing, initial design
meeting. Um, the states finally signed
off on the 30% design phase. Uh the the
designer for the bridge is Michael Baker
International, which is a really good
bridge designing firm. Um that's been
done a couple months ago. Uh they
announced they would have permit plan
sets by April 30 and a 70% design
miday. And the DOT is now starting to
push us to move the construction date up
to the summer of 2026.
And I think the reason they're doing
that is because they're paranoid the
federal government is going to cut the
fed local bridge program. And the sooner
they get to uh you know final
acceptance, even though the federal
government has already agreed to fund
the project, that doesn't mean they
won't do like with so many other federal
grants and just say, "No, we were just
kidding. We're not going to fund it." So
why is that a problem? Well, that's a
problem because next summer we were
supposed to be going to construction on
a state local bridge program that we
delayed uh one year because the design
wasn't through Army Corps of Engineers
permitting.
Um so there's no way we have the
bandwidth to deal with two one state
local and one Fed local bridge program
at the same time. So one of them is
going to have to get bunked. Um, I also
think it's highly unlikely that
uh given past history that the federal
local bridge will be ready to go to
construction next summer. I mean, the
stars and everything would have to align
for that to do. So, but I don't want
them both because in both those grants,
we are responsible to pay the contractor
and then get reimbursed. Um, and when
you've got a $3 million bridge and then
a
$350,000 construction management and
instruction contract, at the same time,
you have a $2 million covert project
going. We don't have the cash to float
both of those waiting for reimbursement.
So, one of those is going to have to go.
Um, I'm just letting you know because
that's something I'm certainly quite
concerned with that, uh, you know, we're
going to get hit with.
Um,
so that is that. Um
uh I listed out on my report the various
contractors that we've already
identified, lined up contractors for the
uh the work um to come into compliance.
Um so most of the electrical upgrades
are already done. Um the eyewash
station, the contractor is just waiting.
We were scheduled for install tomorrow,
but the uh the contractor the the
company says it shipped it, but we
actually don't have it yet. So, until we
get it, they're not going to schedule uh
installation, but that should be pretty
quick. Chimney is plumbed or something,
Erica. Seems like a lot of money for an
eyewash station. Yeah.
So the the problem is the the smart way
to do it is just hard plum in an eyewash
station for the building and be done
with it because it's your lowest overall
maintenance. Yeah. And you don't have to
keep rebying everything every year. And
the standard now is you have to be able
to supply like it's like one liter of
water per minute for 15 minutes. So
you're talking about like a fivegallon
pressurized system now to meet the OSHA
standard. Um so at that point, you know,
and then you got to replace the
chemicals every year or every other
year. And I just felt like it would be
in the long run smarter to just hard
plum one um and do it. So um all I don't
disagree with that. I just it that
clarifies why the cost is there. Yeah,
it's a big chunk. And I was actually
thinking that if we were going to do it,
it would be smart to put in one of the
shower eyewash combo units, but that
gets stupidly expensive because a shower
unit has to supply 20 gallons a minute
for 30 minutes, like 30 minutes
continuously.
um you know and that that's beyond any
normal well pump to deliver. So now you
got to buy the unit, you got to buy a
new well pump, you got to repipe
everything. So so that was out. Um but
buying the eyewash station makes sense.
Yeah. Ju just for reference for the
board probably you guys are following
along in the packet, but that's on page
four. The costs to mitigate these uh
these various things. Yep. So $6,000 for
an eyewash station seemed high. satisfy
this question,
right? And it's come up multiple times
where the town thought they got the
money to hire the assistant for the
community center. Um, that money was
available straight out of the line item
to hire the community center director
for a couple reasons. One, we spent
about $5,000 less on that person that
would be budgeted. and two, we didn't
hire them at the beginning of the year.
So, we had three pay periods missing.
And those two
things combined with when we hired the
assistant were enough that we had the
money in that line item to pay the
assistant and the board of which is part
of the reason why the board of
selectment went along with it uh
originally.
Um the second thing was the
consideration about fee in lie of
healthcare. I know that's really
unpopular with some people on the board
of selectmen. Um I can tell you that I
was not the original proponent of that.
Um that that originally came from one
board of selectman member. Um,
but I've certainly used it to my
advantage in hiring
employees. And you know, we have six
less people on the town's health
insurance than we did in 2021.
So, it has been very effective at
getting people to not take health
insurance and go on their spouses or
whatever um insurance. Um so, overall, I
think it's a good deal. Sure. I didn't
know. Did we move on from your report
onto because I know you have that under
new business as well. Sorry, I don't
have your report up. Yeah. No, it's
still in the report. He just addressed
some of the questions that had been
raised. Okay. It's in both places. So,
there's there's a fair amount of detail
there. He's not going through it all,
but yeah. So, yeah. So, I'm not going
through all of it. Um, we also got had
questions about our current year's uh
healthc care budget, but Eric, can I can
I intervene? Just Thank you. I I just
didn't know when we were going to have
this discussion before he I mean just to
clarify with the I appreciate you giving
your side and your version of why you
like the fee in lie of health insurance.
I mean, it's been widely talked about,
you know, in meetings that Sure., you
know, just since we're discussing it
here, that this isn't something that a
lot of towns offer
anymore. And I I do appreciate, and I
want to say this out loud, like I know
that people look at it differently. In
my world, people either need health
insurance or they don't.
So, I know in one part of your package,
and I apologize if it's not here, you
said that you use it in recruiting
people or things of that nature.
Um, it's just it's costing the taxpayers
a lot of money, you know. Um, people
that need health insurance will take it
if they need it and then they do have to
pay 14% of the premium. So it's not
something that's going to be abused or
taken just simply to take it or not. So
I would say the one thing I would say
and I generally I I I I certainly
sympathize with what you're saying
Joanna and I think norm in most cases
that's probably true but in some cases
employers will offer three rates for to
an employee. One is a single person, two
if you have two people. Oh and three for
a family. Yeah. Right. Mhm. And
sometimes it's only two rates. Yes.
Yeah. And sometimes only two rates. It's
one It's one single person and then a
family. And when that's the case, the
cost between having a single person and
a family, which could be anywhere from
two to 12 people um is huge. So some so
like there was a situation for example
when my wife and I were you know it
would it was cheaper to be on each just
insure ourselves through our insurance.
Um and so we did that versus you know
now damn it but if a company and they
have a twoperson thing so it makes more
sense right but there are some scenarios
where it you know somebody could weigh
that and it would work one work in their
favor to not take it and to have their
spouse go to go to two people instead of
you know family. My point is I I agree
Mark. I think I I love that the
companies offer that twoerson thing now
because like you said a family where
you're let's just use it. It could be
say just generalizations 10,000 for a
single person all the way to 35,000 as a
charge for a family policy which can
cover up to if you have 12 kids or you
know a twoerson thing which is probably
in the 20s or something like that. Um,
yeah. I just I just feel like it's
always going to be an
individual decision whether people need
insurance or not. Kids stay on their
family's policy until they're 26
generally if families get along good and
the parents don't mind keeping their
kids on the policy. Again, it's just the
reason it's brought up and a lot of
people feel the way that I do. Who knows
who feels this way anymore? um it's just
it's costing the town a lot of money,
you know, to pay people not to take
insurance. So, it'll come down to what
the board of selectmen brings up and you
know, we'll talk more on the health
thing. I know Eric has more in the you
know, I have a couple points I want to
make. I don't want to overtake his
report. It I think it's an
individualized thing. um whether people
think, okay, we're keeping them from
taking the the policy. My point is I've
never met a person unless there's some
strange situation that you either need
it or not because you're going to pay to
take it too is what I'm saying. You're
going to have to pay a percentage of the
policy. It's not free. But if if it ends
up the town ends up voting, you know,
it'll be in the board of selectman hands
to talk about it. if they end up keeping
it on, it just is a charge to the
taxpayers for not taking insurance. But
all right, I have more to add later, but
I'll wait till you get to that. What?
Those are the cheapest employees the
town has. What kills the town are people
with families. That's what kills the
town on cost. Yeah, but it doesn't
We understand if you if you will hire a
great person that works and they happen
to have a family, that's fine. Then
that's what it is. I understand it's a
big cost. I don't think you recruit
based on whether someone has a family or
not. It's kind of a roll of the dice.
People either need insurance or don't is
what I'm saying. I'd rather it be a zero
or a we pay the insurance whatever
portion rather than paying
someone
6,600 especially part-time employee you
know to not take insurance. But I did
have one question that popped in Eric. I
had thought this I get that the way the
policy stands now it's a one-time thing
that's the way I've seen it work when
you elect when you join your job the
first time you either sign up for I know
you can change getting insurance later
you either sign up for insurance or you
take the fee in lie of if you're not
taking insurance the way your report
read to us it sounds like people are
jumping back and forth so the fee in lie
of I thought was a onetime
opportunity, but you're saying if
someone doesn't need insurance anymore,
even though they've worked for the town
for five years, they start getting the
fee in lie of later down the road.
Yeah. And every time they do that, it
saves the town seven grand. I know
you're looking at it that way. I'm
looking at it. It's costing the town.
Well, but think about this way. If
you're at the age where you can go on
Medicare, okay, let's take one example.
There's a lot of downsides with
Medicare. Like for me, given the number
of prescriptions I have, Medicare would
be a more costly approach than the
town's insurance.
um just simply when you look at how much
I would end up paying for medication
without going on plan B depending on
what I was able to get that for in my
case if there was no incentive and I was
65 I would absolutely stay on the town's
insurance a 100 days out of a 100
there's two
employees that both came to work for the
town and elected Medicaid instead of the
town's insurance because of the
incentive. So both of those cases that
was a $7,000 savings. We had another
employee in the last month just elected
that was taking the health insurance and
was able to finagle getting insured
through another family member because it
was cheaper for her to do that given the
incentive. I mean that to me is a win.
um every day. That saves us money. So
from my perspective, you know, we went
from 20 people taking health care to the
town to 14, you know, in exchange for an
additional four people or five people
that are not that are getting fee in lie
of um with the same headcount. And to
me, that's a great thing. That's a I
respect your opinion and I do I like to
listen to various sides. I never have a
problem with someone that opposes what I
think about or people speaking their
mind that they should speak their mind
for themselves. But and I so thank you
for that. I see it a whole different
way. Um I just think it's costing the
town money and I don't think it's a
necessity. But I thank you for your
version. Um, you were going to wrap up
into are we talking about the health
care thing now just to get it all out
there? Not for the next budget year. So,
Eric had a note here about the current
budget year, the cost where they're
tracking. Well, you know that I've been
all over that'll be under new business.
So, and Okay. So, I should wait for the
new business to Yeah, I think for that.
Thank you. So, you also brought up that
you felt that we were way over last
year. So, what I did is I gave you a
one-year
snapshot in the town for what we've
spent to date on healthcare. Um, you
know, at the
75% budget portion and then what are all
the contributing factors because right
now we're about
$17,000 under spent on health care. Um
but when you look at the factors that
involved that involved multiple
employees electing to take fee in lie of
and every time you do that that's a
$7,000 savings to the town um as well as
uh so I listed out all of the things
that have changed in that and the reason
I did that is because in any given year
it is easy to have a 30 to
$40,000 swing
you know, when you have as much turnover
as we have and not knowing necessarily
what the the status is of people you're
hiring. So, um, what I would say is that
as far as last year's budget goes, what
we budgeted appeared to be correct at
the starting point of the year. Um, a
lot has changed. We're going to be under
budget overall on that. No question. But
not compared to what our starting
assumptions. This year's a whole
different story. We can talk about that
and I can tell you that we were we were
definitely wrong. Um, you know, in what
we had on there for this year. Um, I
just want Thank you, Eric. I I
appreciate it. Again, I like to hear
explanations. I like to hear I'm just
such a literal person. when we receive
the spreadsheet that we're supposed to,
you know, look at and make sense of. And
I understand the fluctuation of people
changing, people dropping. Maybe this
one needs single, maybe this one not,
but
it scared, you know, I didn't like the
point. I was afraid this mistake had
been happening for a lot of years. I
understand there's going to be
fluctuations like you said, and most of
the time there there will be a surplus
there. So, I just wanted to make sure
that whoever's crafting and putting the
spreadsheet together because we receive
it like I kind of said in an email
today, we don't check it, put the
formulas together, all of that. We do a
lot of I mean, some of us do a lot of
work with it in our, you know, figuring
things. I don't want to speak for anyone
but myself ever again, but um I do a lot
of work with this as far as um checking,
recalculating. So I knew that night when
I walked into the town meeting that we
were overcharging at that point. Yes.
Will it fluctuate during the year, but
we have to start somewhere. So yeah,
let's let's Yeah. So I think we'll he is
addressing me, Mark, and I've spent a
lot of time on this waiting for the
answer. So I do appreciate Eric
addressing it tonight because I've
waited a couple weeks. I think the town
meeting was a couple weeks ago. And
that's okay. And Cheryl did respond
today, too, with something, Eric. So I
appreciate that. But that's all. But I I
understand it's going to fluctuate. It
just made me nervous that when I found a
mistake this year that it probably had
been going back several years. I'll move
on from that. Thank you.
All right. Next agenda item is the check
register. I don't know if anybody's very
short um in the packet today. I don't
know if anybody has any questions on
that. Okay. Okay. Well, hearing none, uh
we'll go on to uh new business. So, the
first one is the next topic. We just
tucking segueed into the new review of
the healthc care costs.
Actually, we should have budget to
actual. Oh, I'm sorry. It's not listed
in the uh in the Yeah.
Yeah. Review of Okay, I jumped it. Oh,
they were flipped in the packet. So, I
thought maybe it wasn't in there. Okay.
Uh, so this is we're about threequarters
of the way through the year as you
pointed out, Eric. Any place we have a
Oh, I All right. Okay. My mistake. I was
misreading once. What? Sure.
So, I wanted to do a more thorough
review now because we normally do that,
you know, we're about threearters of the
way through the budget. So, we know kind
of uh where we are overall. Um,
presuming uh we have time to do that.
Um, I think that's certainly
appropriate. Um, do you want me to share
or do you want me to just talk through
kind of what the big things are that are
going to be affecting it?
Well, if sharing is hard to read on
these screens, so I don't know if it'll
add that much value. Um, but certainly I
think if you could notate which specific
lines you're talking about as we go
through it, it might be helpful. That's
my thought. If anybody wants to share
the screen, we can do that, too. This
just starts on page eight of your
packet.
If there's a lot, I would appreciate it
being shared. I'm more visual to see it
if we could, but if there's one or two
that we're going to mention, then I'm
okay with not seeing it on the screen.
No, I got a whole bunch. So, let me
Yeah, I would appreciate I'll go close.
I'll shut my camera off and go close to
the screen.
Thank you.
Okay. So, hang on a
second.
Share. Okay. So, first up, let's talk
about revenue overall because that's one
of the the you know, that's essentially
half the uh battle. Um, so right now the
bottom line is on paper we're about a
million and a half dollars short on
revenue. Um, but what I can tell you is
that we're already, you know, we know in
April, end of April, beginning of May,
we're going to get the last million
dollars of ECS funding. Um,
so, you know, a million of that is
basically guaranteed by the state at
this point. Um, and if you look at the
collections so far for April, we're up
to around
$570,000, which means, you know,
regardless of anything else, revenues
are going to come in uh somewhat over
expectations. Um, and we're still going
to get a lot of transfer station passes
in and we're coming into the busy part
of the uh building uh season. So, you
know, our revenues from the building
department are going to be up. So, I
can't give you a a a guesstimate at this
point how far we're going to be over
revenues, but we've already accounted
for all the revenues that we expect. So,
we know we're going to be over for the
year um on
revenues. Questions on that?
You can see down in the bottom says
total income to this point 11 million2
versus 12 million7. Um if you go up
you'll see the
uh um ECS funding right here. Um that's
a million dollars worth of that. The
rest is the fact that this is the last
collection quarter for the tax
collector. So we know we're going to be
in good shape. Part of the reason is
Kate has been much more proactive
uh about collecting back taxes. So
that's definitely boosting us. Um so so
we're going to be in good shape overall
on revenue. So one of we didn't have
anything anything for supplemental motor
vehicle taxes, but there's
$250,000 to the positive
there. Is that really budgeted? Yes. So,
I'll tell you why. Because every year we
budget that we will collect
100% of property tax in a given year,
but we all know we don't. On average, we
collect about 97 thou
97%. But that varies from year to year.
almost always in an average year that
pretty closely balances out the
supplemental. Um, and a year out you
can't really guess what your
supplemental is going to be because
there's too many things that go into it.
The economy goes bad. People don't buy
new cars. So most years those balance
out, but the variability from year to
year is like 70 or $80,000.
So you have to be aware that that guess
of the combined property tax plus
supplemental tax is going to
vary, you know, solidly up or down, you
know,
$75,000. So that's always one of my
scares in a budget going in is not
knowing exactly what I have for
revenues. And we've talked about
separating out and trying to estimate
the the supplemental and not just motor
vehicle, it's supplemental motor vehicle
plus
uh supplemental tax bills on personal
property and supplemental on real
estate. and we just we just haven't done
it because if you look at it over a long
period of
time those two the supplementals
typically run to be around 3% but it
does vary and there is a fair bit of
variability both in how much we collect
and what the supplemental is. So that's
that's the reason why it's the way it
is. I know that's probably unsatisfying
for a lot of people.
Kim. Um, Eric, could you just scroll
down a little bit to the education
section, please? I just want to make
sure that what I'm seeing is correct.
And could you just scroll over a little
bit to Well, it's my right. Just want to
make sure that I'm not missing any of
the
columns. I appreciate that. Just give me
a second. I just want to take a look
here.
So, the left column is the current
current amount. The center is the budget
and the right is difference. All right.
Thanks, Eric. I appreciate that.
Okay. Can I ask how AC can I ask how
accurate these numbers are? These
education numbers. I mean, those
accurate like AES's board of ed, they've
only spent
$870,000 thus far.
So that to some
extent is the lack of data transfer
between the school and the town. Um um
Cheryl did get a whole big bunch of back
bake bank statements. So I suspect that
the accuracy of that will be much closer
next month. But okay.
Yeah. Thank you, Eric.
Okay, so the first one I want to talk
about is the town clerk's
office. Obviously, we don't have we are
running at this point with just an
assistant town clerk. So that
21,2 plus the 2,000 that will go
unspent. So, the bottom line is we're
going to have about a
$23,000 surplus in the town clerk's
office. Um, just by virtue of the board
of selectment does not seem to want to
appoint. They want to wait for the next
election cycle and let that person be
voted on as opposed to appointing them
now and then having them go to the end
of what would have been Carol's term.
So, um, I'm suspecting we're going to
have a $23,000 surplus
there. So, next, Eric, can I ask a
question on that? I don't know if it's
appropriate. I don't want to ask
anything personal, but I know that we're
retaining our former town clerk for
training and everything. Wouldn't that
line be used
to pay that person? So, we might not
have a surplus there. I I have no idea
what the contract is or what you've
done, but would that line the one where
the funds are being expended from? We do
not have a contract. Oh, okay. Um I
proposed a contract to the board of
selectmen
or gave them what I thought was
appropriate.
um does not appear from what I can tell
that they have any interest in signing a
contract. Um therefore that will go
unexpected. So I believe Oh no, thank
you. I didn't know if you know I've been
to the board of selectman meetings where
they've talked about it. So we have no
knowledge of anything having happened
but I thought maybe some funds would be
coming from that line. Okay. Correct. So
I don't believe they will but Okay. Who
knows? Maybe they sign a contract and
back
pay in June. I mean that that's on them.
Um because that is not a because I have
no responsibility for that office.
Although I gave them a proposal, they
they may accept it or not. That that's
on them. Um the next one I want to talk
about a little bit are
uh really is elections. Um, if you go
down to the elections line, you can see
where we still have a pretty good
surplus in elections, you know, kind of
all the way
through. Um, part of that is the fact
that the state did after saying they
wouldn't last year
did have supplemental funding for early
elections.
Um, and the second is we're, you know,
the
registars, you know, are still working
through what they really need for
staffing levels and and all of that. Um,
so we're going to have, you know, at
least 12,000 back in that line item. So
that's going to account for a fairly
good chunk. Um, the next one down, Eric,
on the elections, is is that a is that a
running total or is that the total for
the year? I mean, we still have an
election coming up. So, just
curious like the 22,000 budget for
election salaries. Is that is that the
amount for the year or is that a three
three? I just wonder how it's accured in
the budget. Do you know? Uh, election
salaries, no, it's budgeted once. That's
what's been expended on election
salaries. Okay. Yeah, I mean we're still
we still have a surplus clearly. I just
was curious. Yeah, we have a pretty good
surplus. That's why I said 12,000
because we're going to spend at least a
thousand on the referendum, but that
doesn't have early voting implications.
Now, if we go to six referendums like we
had in the past, we could chew up a
bunch of that money. But failing that,
we're going to have a pretty good
surplus. um building department, we're
going to be over spent by somewhere
around
$12,000 that we're going to make need to
make up. And that is because we ended up
hiring a zoning agent that had zero
experience. Um so with the board of
selectman's permission, I established a
pretty long overlap between the two
individuals. Um, so we had about four
months where we were paying them both at
the same time as one was training the
other as they assumed the
responsibilities. And frankly, there's a
huge shortage of
uh, you know, zoning agents. So I think
that's uh, you know, that's an
unfortunate reality. The good news is
that uh we conditioned the pay on the
new employee on getting certified and
fully trained. And since that's a
multi-year process, we're going to see
lower costs in the future up until the
point where he gets fully trained and
and Casio certified. So, we'll have a
period of lower expenses, but right now
in this budget, um that one's definitely
going to be over. We're not over yet,
but we have a whole quarter to go
through and we've already blown through
that whole budget. So, I'm giving you a
heads up that that's going to happen.
Um
so duh
um civil
preparedness I am going to recommend to
the planning and zoning commission that
we give the uh EMC or emergency
management communication person for the
town who also heads
the town of Andover's uh C, which is
civilian emergency response team, a
onetime bonus. And the reason is is that
she is the primary person that had to
produce the update to, you know, the
every four-year update to the town's uh
emergency management plan overall, which
was a lot of work on her part. And
because she did that and we got it
certified, um, we were able to get a
grant for
$5,000. So, I would like to take a
portion of that grant and give her a
bonus for getting it in on time um, and
then applying for the grant because she
got it in on time. So, she did all the
work. She should get some benefit, but
that's still got to go through the board
of selectmen. Don't know whether they'll
agree with it or not. We're certainly
going to be fine on that line item
overall. Um community center, we're
going to be okay. Um even with the uh
the assistant, which was not an
originally budgeted item. Um you can see
the assistant has up to this point spent
$4,400. Um but combining those two,
we're still going to be under. So, not a
lot to
uh worry about there, at least as far as
I am concerned on uh town expenses
overall. Um
we're closer than I would like. Um we
did get a lot more website fees than we
anticipated. Um that's one of the things
we're quite a bit over. Um not a huge
deal. Um, but part of the issue is
that the company we use, Civic Plus, and
our communication platform, which is
Civic Ready, I mean, they won't you
can't ask them this year what the
contract is going to be for next year.
Um, and they they don't run on a town's
fiscal cycle. They run on a January to
January cycle. So, we got hit with a
fairly large increase there. that put us
way over what we
anticipated. Um, also if you see the
line for propane
uh was
overexpended. Um, there was two reasons
for that. The first is that because we
put in two brand new tanks. Um, we
started the year with zero propane in
there. Um, and we'll finish the year
with with fairly full tanks. So, even
though we've overexpent
$2,000, you know, we've still got, you
know, probably $3,000 worth of propane
sitting in the tank that we didn't have
at the beginning of this budget cycle.
Um the other thing is since we are
playing off uh electrical usage versus
propane usage in the winter because the
town hall now has dual heating sources.
We can heat completely with propane or
completely with electricity. Um, I want
one full budget cycle and then to be
able to look at all our usage um and
compare it to heating degree days,
figure out where we are and then make
recommendations for next year how we
balance um electrical usage versus
propane usage. Um, just not there yet.
Um, advertising, as you well know, we
had a board of selectman position open
for uh six or seven months. That was an
awful lot of extra adverts. Uh in the
River East, we use River East primarily
because they are the cheapest
[Music]
uh cheapest spot we can post official
notices on legally because they do have
a townwide
circulation. Um
insurance overall, we're
uh okay at the moment. Um, it's going to
depend to some extent on I think we're
going to stay okay. What I don't know
yet is when we're actually getting the
fire truck and as soon as we get the
fire truck, we're about to add a million
dollars to our ESIP policy. Um, which
will boost that. So, presuming that
doesn't hit before the end of the year,
we're going to be fine on insurance.
um employee
benefits. If you look at everything
together, social security and med scroll
down so we can follow. Oh, sorry.
Yeah. If you look at uh employee
benefits in total,
um we're going to be okay. Um, we're
definitely going to be under on health
and dental, but that was simply because
of personnel changes. We're going to be
over a little bit on social security and
med, but not a lot. Um, so, and on MURF,
we're going to be okay. So, um, we
haven't paid our admin fees yet. We
haven't paid our amortization fees yet.
So, those things are going to be coming
in. Overall, we look like we're going to
be uh okay on employee benefits overall
by somewhere around
15K, but all of that is going to be in
the health and dental insurance. We
should be pretty close to being on on
the other items.
Um,
uh, town garage overall we look okay.
Um, I'm not seeing any real issues with
that. Our expenditure is pretty well in
line with where we are in the budget
series. I know we've been looking at a
bunch of building maintenance tasks that
we would like to do. Um, presuming we're
not going to go over on the other, we'll
schedule that for the last quarter of
this year. Um, we usually try not to
spend much out of building maintenance
just in case we have any oopses during
the year uh in the building. Um, I don't
necessarily think we're going to do it
at all. Um, one of the things we're
starting to pick away at is is, you
know, it it's a 150 year old building.
We're having a lot of problems with uh
some of the doors and we're also having
a lot of problems with bricks falling.
But that's a big that's a CIP
conversation because the fix to that
building is a couple
hundred,000. Um you know when we have a
leaky roof in the cold storage area,
both our cold storage areas, which is
we're going to have to address at some
point, but that's not not happening in
this budget.
Um, let me scroll
down. The old firehouse is where is
that? Old firehouse is going to be uh
definitely over budget. That is just uh
the service fees for three-phase power
which we have to maintain until we tear
that building down. I had anticipated
we'd have already torn it down this
year, but we just haven't gotten to
that. So, that we're going to be over.
Um, the next big one we're going to be
over quite a bit is the town engineer
line.
Um, and but and part of that
is we're going to end up cleaning up. A
lot of those fees are related to the uh
construction of the athletic fields and
we should be able to use most of that as
the town's
contribution towards the uh the project
the the pickle ball and playground and
the the what's called the phase two uh
you know improvements at the wreck
field. Um, so we should be able to use
that money we're spending as in the town
engineer as part of the town's
contribution, which means we will not
have to spend that money out of the
multi-use building fund. So, we are
over, but ultimately, you know, the town
is on the hook for 20% of the cost of
the steep grant project. This counts
towards those costs. So, in the end, uh
that will um we're definitely over, but
we're over for a specific reason, and we
should be able to not spend that same
amount of money out of the multi-use
building fund by spending it here, and
we'll be able to cover it from somewhere
else in the budget. Uh none of those are
too significant. public works overall
looks like it's
okay. Um, you know, we were it looks
like unless we get another snowstorm,
which I hope not, that we're going to be
okay on public works labor for snow
removal. Um, we are going to be pretty
much fully expent on the both sand and
salt. um for this year. I know it
doesn't show it this year, but we just
had to
um we've blown through our entire supply
and we're doing what we do in a normal
year, which is pre pack the shed. So, at
the beginning of the year, we have a
fair amount to work with. So, we did use
more salt this year than we have in
years past. Um, and we did use uh more
sand than than kind of we were
anticipating, but overall public works
is okay. I'm pretty sure that budget
overall will come out uh fairly well. Um
even um we are going to be in the
transfer station definitely under on
tipping fees and if you notice from this
year's budget we've reduced that uh to
account. This is really our first full
year on the new contract. Um, and so
it's it's somewhat unclear what
[Music]
uh, you know, until we got into it, it
was pretty hard to predict. Um, and
frankly, the amount of polls we get per
year is a fairly v variable number. So,
it's not like we have the same amount of
trash every year. That's variable within
five or 10%. So there's always a fair
bit of uncertainty in that number. Um
the one thing that I'll bring your
attention to which has been one of my
real bugaboos is what's called the
environ energy and environmental fee.
Um, this is kind of a slush fee that
Cassella builds into all their contracts
and it essentially accounts for the cost
of fuel and it accounts for all the
things that affect their business prop,
you
know, profitability. Um, and it's really
annoying because there's no good way to
figure out in advance what that fee is
going to be. Um, and it's really hard to
even get a straight answer on uh what
that uh what it contains. I've read
through the corporate literature, but
it's it's quite vague. Um, but there's
also doesn't seem to be any way we can
get out of dealing with it. Um, the
other thing we're going to be a fair bit
over is the compactor lease. Um, as you
remember, we talked about it. Cassella
some point this year figured out that
hey they actually have two that are
being leased, not one. Um, and so they
started charging us for both of their
contractors, not just one. I've known
that for the last five years that
they've been undercharging me, but I
wasn't going to tell them. Um, but now
they found out, so now we're paying. Um,
overall we should be okay. In public
works, um, recycling, we're in good
shape. Overall,
um, we're going to have some
expenses due to mid nerok that we
haven't gotten yet because their
expenses, their their hazardous waste
collection is like a late summer and
fall thing and then it starts up again
in April. So, we're going to have some
extra, you know, budgets to that, but
overall we're in pretty good shape. Not
a huge number, but it's good that good
that we're under.
Um, ground care, we're quite a bit under
right now. Um, but frankly, we haven't
gotten a bill from Hebrin. They're kind
of famous for giving us one big bill
very late in the year. So, I think we're
going to be safely under, but um you
know, there's a lot of billing and a lot
of work that's gone into this that we
haven't been build for yet. So, don't
know exactly where that's going to come
out. The custodian we're going to be
well under. Um last year, we budgeted
when wi when uh Willie took over the
responsibility for cleaning the
community center. Um, and we really had
no idea how many how many hours a week
that was going to take. He's been pretty
efficient for that. So, we just haven't
been spending that money. So, we're
going to have a pretty good chunk back
in the custodian budget. I'm guessing
we're going to be around 5,000 under for
the year on that one.
Um, so pretty much everything else is
okay until we go down to the planning
and zoning
commission.
And this is where I'll find it. Hang
on. Planning and zoning commission. Um,
so we are way the heck over on legal
fees. Um, the reason why I wasn't
bringing this to your attention before
is it looked like we were going to have
a final settle settlement in this fiscal
year. Um, and so the the bottom line is
the town is suing
uh a person over the gravel pit
operation on Route Six.
So, they're definitely in violation. We
will definitely get our legal fees back
out of this. So, ultimately, this is
going to go away. Um, and I was pretty
sure it was going to go away in this
budget year because it looked like they
had a buyer for the property and they
would have had to settle with that
before they sold. But it looks like the
buyer for that portion just in the last
week or so um is maybe not going
through. So it may be past this fiscal
year when we uh actually settle. So
we're going to get that money back, but
we may not get that money back in this
fiscal year. So we're obviously, you
know, almost $15,000 over budget on
that, which is why I'm bringing it to
your attention.
So, I guess what I would say is overall
when you take away all the things we're
over and all the things we're under, um,
we're going to be under budget on
expense. There's going to be a few
things that were quite a bit over. Um,
and I kind of explained why and there's
a bunch of things that are going to be
quite a bit under. Um, and I kind of
explained why those particular items are
under.
Um, any questions to this point? So, I
mean, the takeaway really is that we're
going to be over on revenue. I can't
tell you how much at this point. And
unless something really bad happens and
we really get whacked by OSHA, you know,
we're going to bring the town budget
overall under. Um, so we look like we're
in pretty good shape. Um, and I'm more
than happy to take any questions on
this. So, I know it's a lot to throw at
you. It was helpful. I think it was a
good overview. Um, questions for Eric?
Any any of these line items?
No, thank you for the information, Eric.
Thank you, Eric. That excellent
explanation of all those things.
Appreciate that. It is timely. It's a
good time to have it. So, I appreciate
that we did it. Yeah. Thank you. I just
had a question. Um, yeah, thank you as
well from me. We will have a session
probably with Cheryl, you know, the
overages versus
um you know, we'll have a session one of
our meetings with the transfers, I
imagine, after the fiscal year ends or
whatever. Correct. Yeah. Before because
we have to approve them before the year
ends, right? Yeah. I do know. Yeah. per
the auditor. Um, in years past, we have
made up the department by department
line items and evened all of them out.
And the auditor basically last year
said, you know, you're kind of crazy to
do that. All you really have to do is
level, you know, you've got to make
you've got to be even at the department
level. So that's what we did last year,
which means there's a lot less
corrections we have. And the ones I gave
you are basically the ones that are
going to be the corrections unless
something else happens that are
catastrophic.
That's what I thought. Yep. Thank you.
I've got a
question. Um, is there any wiggle room
at all between like the under and the
over? Can you take something from the
under and bring it to the over in
another line item?
Well, that's what we do with the
transfers. Within a budget, we generally
just can make the change, right? But
otherwise, we have to approve the
transfers before the end of the year.
But we can you remember kind of we got
away from doing that on the fly. We kind
of set a policy where major major
transfers we would end up, you know,
reconciling at in a batch mode
basically.
But can you do that with things that are
really
not kind of the same?
Yeah. Yeah, we can. I mean, it's either
if you're if you're under budget, you
got to move some money in from a fund to
pay for it in some some way, some either
contingency fund or some other fund. And
if you're over, you're going to be
moving it into a fund. So, it's kind of
a wash. Okay. It's a good question, but
yeah, that's how that would generally
work.
Other questions for Eric?
All right, then I will stop sharing.
Okay. All right. Then then the the real
check register of is actually following
this. So there's the normal normal
listed makes more sense.
Yep. I don't know if anybody has any
questions on the check register.
Sable
hit. Okay. Well, nobody has any
questions. We can move on to 6A, which
is new business. Uh, and this is the
review of the healthcare costs. So, we
already talked about this a little bit
and Cheryl did send an email uh
responding to Joannne's query. Um, you
know, I just skimmed over it. I don't
know if everyone's had a chance to read
it. I'm still kind of catching up from
being away, but um it it does indicate
as Joanne uh had strongly s suggested uh
that there was an error in the
spreadsheet. So, we did overbudget by
the amount. Of course, as we know things
can change uh because of personnel
shifts or whatever, but Eric, do you
have anything more to add?
Nope. Today was the first time Cheryl,
myself, and Chris uh have sat in a room
for uh since you went to Florida uh a
long time ago. So that was kind of
today's major topic was to review that.
Um, and I also think that at some point,
um, you know, and and so I asked, you
know, it's been an ask of mine for a
while that we sit down and review it.
Um, and and I do agree with Joanne, but
I'm not going to say that's over unless
I get an official opinion from the
treasurer. And so that's why you got the
response from her, not me. Yeah. I have
a followup if I could. Yep. Go ahead,
Jordan. So, I know in our process, in
our budget process, one part we had
noticed, and I do appreciate Cheryl
getting back, you know, and I know
everybody's main concern was we can't
change it. We can't change it. And I get
that because we had already moved it
along. I tried my best to, you know, get
it taken care of in the town meeting.
And I understand that it couldn't, you
know, people weren't just going to go
solely on my thought, you know, even
though I was pretty sure, but during our
process, Eric, um, and this is just so
that it doesn't happen again, we knew
that supposedly the part that was
budgeted was an 8% amount and at one
point we had already asked that it get
changed to the seven 7% not 7 o'clock,
7% amount. So, whatever that will be,
that will be. I know that the whole
thing everybody's trying to tell us is,
hey, we can't change. I I get that. I
just want to make sure going forward and
that's all I reiterate in things is, you
know, not playing a blame game,
whatever, just what whatever there was a
mistake. We want to make sure that
whatever we're handed in the future is
just correct. So, now I have this
feeling of worry in my mind that there
could be other mistakes in other places.
that was just such a big figure that I
was able to just try to compute it real
quick, you know. So, yeah, I I I have a
thought on that. So, I I think it might
make sense to convene and and maybe this
is the wrong word, but a committee,
maybe a group of two or three people to
sit there and just go through page by
page, formula by formula. Anything
that's should be a formula should be a
locked cell. It's a nuisance doing all
that, but you can um and then you know
that way we we protect um you know
protect the the integrity of the data
and the formulas a little better. And
Mark, that's my whole thing and I
appreciate what you're saying because
I'm on the same wavelength like I tried
to we're volunteers, we're elected,
we're appointed, you know, we're taking
it in but we did not put this
spreadsheet together so we can't know
every single little ins and out of it.
So, right. Yeah. I And even if it was
perfect at one time, it got overwritten.
And you guys saw me change numbers on
the fly during the meeting trying to
keep track. You got to be very careful.
And now that we're here, we would hope,
you know, whoever's going to be
responsible for putting the data in the
first spreadsheet or, you know, we can
we can convene before this happens. I
mean, we were in a definitely changed,
rushed year
um and this is what came of it. You
know, I'm personally glad we found
mistakes and of if we did, we're going
to bring them up and we can see what
happens in the future. And just to since
we're on this topic of this thing, I
believe every year, Eric, the thought is
to put the actuals in there. I
understand that it's going to vary. It
could change. You know, someone could
leave, someone could not need health
insurance, and and I get all of that. To
me, I'm such a, again, I always go back
to the literal. I just wanted to know
there was a mistake. I feel like there
was a lot of, you know, fluffing on the
side. Oh, that's and it was it it's it's
all okay. We're all here. You know, we
we understand there's going to be
overages and undergrades or under
whatever the word is. But just want to
make sure in the future that we're we're
basing that on what we have actual
employees at the time because we're
funding a line. That's your best gift.
So, moving forward trying to come up
with a plan that something that like
this doesn't happen again. Yeah, you're
you know, no question. And I will tell
you that every budget since I've been
here has had errors in it. I don't think
there's any question. Um, you know, and
there's errors a bunch of different
ways, you know. I I mean I can tell you
that based
on what was released today by the
consensus
uh you know state appropriations group
probably we will get our rec funding
back.
Um, you know, when I talked to
legislators a couple weeks ago, they
were like, "No, the governor's adamant
we're moving towards the revised ECS for
and he's not going to accept that." Now,
maybe he does, maybe he doesn't. I mean,
if I were making that guess today, I
would probably gamble that uh that money
got put back in there. Um, next year
will be much easier because it's a
bianial budget. Um, but last year, you
know, we got
$79,000 in revenue from the state we
weren't anticipating because the state
surplus was higher than it was and a
certain fraction of that comes back to
the state. Well, 80 grand is an awful
lot of money. You know, that's not
something we budgeted for. Um, but I
think we can all agree that there's a
difference in kind between an, you know,
something that changes due to external
factors and just making sure that the
the spreadsheet is correct, you know.
Sure. Yep.
Yeah. Okay. Anybody have any other
comments or questions on that?
No. Thank you for the in-depth
discussion and for Cheryl and and
everybody addressing it. Um, yeah, and
we'll have a plan moving forward. Yep.
Okay, I guess we can move on to 6B,
which is legislative updates. Eric, you
did send some stuff out the last hour
this afternoon. Uh, yeah, I apologize
for that, but they just put it out this
afternoon. I did skim through all 250
pages of documentation. I don't expect
you to because I knew the things that I
was concerned with. So, of the things I
was concerned with, it does look like
they reversed the governor's
recommendation to zero out all the early
election uh support and funding. So,
potentially we'll have $5,000 more 5 to
7,000 more state revenue to go towards
early voting than we were anticipating.
Um because up to this point we haven't
seen any indication that anybody was
considering it. Um but the
appropriations commission appears to
have restored that funding. Uh the
appropriations commission at least has
uh held the town harmless on the ECS
funding. So that's plus
$89,000 uh to the town. um they agreed
with the governor on the uh pilot the
payment in lie of so that should stay
the same as our estimates. Um the
negative is that the legislature has
been actively considering a change to
the state local bridge program. Um
myself and and a bunch of the other
small town administrators have been
lobbying very hard for them to increase
the state share of that fund to 75%. and
increase the uh amount of the annual
bond because that's paid for through
bond funding that they bond fund because
as as most of you know our biggest
liabilities in terms of infrastructure
are failed culverts. Um, you know, and
if if we got bit hard by a storm, um, I
could easily see us with a 10 plus
million dollar, uh, you know, emergency
appropriation to fix all that. So, it
really is that serious. Um, but given
our budget constraints, you know, we're
budgeting for it as fast as we can.
If we could get the state to up their
contribution to 75% or even 66% that
would increase the rate at which we
could address our problems. But they
don't appear to do it and they do not.
There was a pretty
bipartisan push to increase funds for
the state rail trail. As you know, our
public works spends not a lot of money,
but definitely labor on maintaining the
trail because the state D flat out does
not have the money or the manpower to do
it. Um, I was hoping that would change
with this budget cycle, but that doesn't
appear to it. So, that's pretty much all
I have on the legislative update.
There's still some things um I'm hoping
come out of the legislature and I'm
hoping we don't get stuck with too many
more unfunded mandates because there
about 60 or 70 things that have time or
cost implications to towns that are
still actively uh up for bills in the
legislature. So that's all I got for
that.
Can I say question? Sure.
Um, I heard you talking uh at the board
of selection meeting about um the state
replacing our our
signs like speed signs and stuff. Did
that already start?
Not the speed signs project. What you're
seeing is
um something which I've been getting a
lot of flack for the last couple days is
the state has been installing new
curvature warning signs. Yes. right near
my house. Only a bunch of them seem to
be really bizarre. Um, we signed up for
that program in like 2019 and it took
the state six years to pull the trigger
on it. I had totally forgot about it.
Um, you know, until we got a
notification earlier this year that,
yeah, it's probably going to happen this
year. And then, um, and then they just
came and started putting signs in. So,
yeah, gotten a bunch of complaints about
them. Um, the public works foreman and I
have talked about it and we're going to
start there's some of them that we can
move to areas that are less obnoxious so
they're not right in the faces of the
homeowners who have them in their front
yards. Um,
I was just going to say I I'm not sure
so much as I heard from a couple people
today about one put on Bear Swap. I know
that's It doesn't bother me,
but I think the person that talked to me
said, "Are we really paying for these
new signs? What is that sign for?" And I
didn't know that that was one of the
signs that fell over into the safe
program. I said, "Geez, I I'll ask Eric
about it." So, it's nice to know that we
didn't pay for that sign. Yeah. No, we
didn't pay. It's not our labor, but it's
probably going to be our labor moving
them. Um, at least some of them. What
they were supposed to have put up on the
sharp curbs is the horizontal chevrons
indicating that you're going around a
curve and you have to pay attention
before you drive off the road and kill
yourself. Um, some of the signage they
put up seemed just really bizarre to me.
Um,
so, uh, yeah. Yep. Eric. Um, so very
selfishly, I I was wonder if I could go
back to the conversation, and I say
selfishly because I live on Baris Swamp
Road and I live on the other side of
what has been identified as a failing
culvert. Sure. And you know, if you
said, like you said, if we had a really
bad storm, this road could be washed out
and there's no way out the other end of
the Bear Swamp. It's it's a dead end.
So, I mean, uh, what would happen? You'd
always be able to walk. you could borrow
one of the town ebikes. I'm sure it
would be fine.
But I just want I mean is there any way
that the state, you know, would look at
something like that and say, you know,
this
is, you know, this is a a dead-end road.
It's a covert that's been identified as
failing. And you know, if you had a
storm, we could be stranded up here on
Bear Swamp Road.
So, here's the here's the basic problem
is that uh the last funding cycle when
we got approved and we got one culvert
through the appropriation for a 50%
reimbursement. Um you can't submit one
unless it's rated less. Culverts are
rated on a scale of basically one to
nine. It's got to be a three or lower to
really even be eligible to come up on
the
program. Um, yours is a two. Um, so it's
definitely eligible, but only about one
culvert in three that applies for the
funding actually gets the funding in any
given year because there just is not
enough funding to go around. Um, we were
very lucky to get funded and that is one
of the reasons why we hired Nathan
Jacobson as our town engineer is because
they have a really good success rate of
getting culverts through the local
bridge program. Um, so yeah, it's a
concern. You're certainly not the only
person um in that and there's a
potential I mean there's definitely a
potential in a in a catastrophic
rainstorm that we could suffer a lot of
damage. Um you know but I can only fund
it at the rate where we're putting money
into the the bridge and covert fund and
things that I can get applied. So that's
yeah, I I recognize it's a
vulnerability. Um we've got a number of
them. Um and a number that are safety
concerns. I mean, you know, our town
engineer five years ago told us we
probably should consider not driving
over Lake Road at POA. Um that was his
recommendation. Um it's in the program,
you know. Um but that's where we're at.
Thank you.
Mark, can I go ahead with a question?
Not on the coverts. Um, just quick
question, Eric. By chance, if the budget
does fail at referendum, we're able I
know we're not able to make any of these
corrections like adding in the ECS
funding or anything because everything's
set in stone. But if it does fail, we're
allowed to add those back in. Correct. I
mean any if the budget fails, you
basically get a fresh start, right? Um
you can adjust
anything in any line item. The budget
automatically gets bifurcated and goes
to both the budget meeting and the
referendum as a bifurcated budget. Um,
basically what happens is I'm going to
recommend to you as a board that you
schedule a special meeting for the day
after the referendum because the
referendum is on May 6th. May 7th would
be a Wednesday. You schedule a Wednesday
special meeting. If you don't need it
and the referendum passes, you're free.
If you don't, then you have to get a a
budget back to the public. um
essentially ASAP. So because the
following Tuesday
um so six days later would be the next
budget meeting and then that would be
followed um two weeks later by the
referendum if it passes the budget
meeting. Okay. So, but yes, if it fails,
you can very definitely I mean if it
fails, you're going to end up having to
cut line items because it only fails
because people are unhappy that spending
is too high and your only solution to
that is uh you know is cutting.
Certainly in previous times when uh
boards of finance tried to brazen it out
and put the same budget back to the
public, it was not well received.
Well, I I would argue that in this case,
the challenge might be the school budget
and the intention. We have a new
charter, so the you know, people are
unhappy with the school budget. Town
budget might hold uh hold on its own,
right? Clearly, we have a large increase
and there's some concern about that. So,
yep. And you know, that's a decision
with the board of finance where you go
with it. Um,
no, thank you for the answer to my
question. Yeah. Okay.
Okay. Any other questions about the
legislative actions?
Okay. Well, I guess then we
um the next one we have is the impact of
the ocean inspection. Do you have
anything to add? We haven't already
talked about um No, I think I beat that
to death already. just to tell you that
um that's going to whack the
uh building maintenance fund for around
26 grand. Um and we're going to take
some money uh out of the uh contingency
um to cover. Do we know if those fine
will we'll we'll know the amount of the
fines and the and the real costs of
remediation before the end of this
budget year? Yeah. Yeah. apparently kind
of implied that but I don't know we
really stated it right as far as I
understand it you know it's a quick
because you're only unless there's
some real serious reason why it has to
take more than 30 days. Your final
correction plan has to be in and
submitted and adjudicated 30 days
essentially after you get the you have
the the meeting with them. Okay. So,
within 45 days, we should have a final
resolution of that as I understand it.
Further questions from Eric on the OSHA?
Yeah. Actually, going back to the the
election, I mean the
referendum, will the
referendum be um passing both budges at
the same time or is that actually going
to be separated
now? For the first time, it is not
separated per the charter. But it's only
bifurcated if it fails once. Okay. So
once it fails, it gets bifurcated. There
will be two votes though. There will be
a vote on the RAM budget and there will
be a vote on the town overall budget.
Um, but if the town budget passes and
the RAM budget passes, you still don't
have an opportunity to set the mill rate
because although we put the RAM budget
in our budget as a
placeholder, that's it's just like any
revenue source or expense source that
you can't control because you're saying
if the RAM budget does not pass.
Correct. Okay. Sound like you said if
they both pass. Oh, if they both pass,
you're home free. Yeah. Okay. You know,
and then the only thing you have to do
is we have to talk about when you want
to set the mill rate because it might
be, you know, you might be able to hold
off setting the mill rate until we know
one way or the other what the revenues
are going to be. You can't push it off
too long because then you back up the
the tax collector's office, but you may
be able to wait long enough to do that
so that you can account for the
$89,000 if we're going to get that back.
Can you just remind me real quick uh
when the RAM referendum vote is? Uh May
6. Same as same day. Okay. Same day.
That's why we sped up the
whole So we That's why we need that May
7th special meeting set. Correct.
Correct. Unless of course you're
positive it's going to pass a
referendum, but uh always cancel the
meeting. Yeah, exactly. Why don't we do
we need a motion on that, Mark? Just you
want me to move and Well, I mean, we're
kind of out of our Let's wait till we
get the board open discussion, I would
say, just so we follow the agenda. Yeah.
Yeah, sure. Any other questions on the
OSHA impact or legislative stuff?
Okay. Well, I'll move on to the next
item in the agenda, which is the
approval of the meeting minutes. Um, so
before we start on that, if anybody
wants to make motions to approve these
minutes, there's an error. The first
item there 7A says trio board meeting
minutes, but the meeting minutes that
are included are actually the December
regular uh meeting. Yeah. Uh so that one
is is probably off the table for
tonight. Um it's a December 18th regular
meeting minutes instead of the tri board
meeting minutes. So that we'll still
have to revisit tribard meeting minutes
at another time. Um however, the others
are there. If anybody wants to make a
motion to approve any of the uh any of
the meeting minutes there, 7A, 7B, uh
etc. I don't know if everybody sees
these, but the 7B is the January 22 uh
regular
meeting. And I'm going to make a motion
to approve those minutes.
Mark, are we going to do Oh, go ahead. I
was going to say I had a couple notes on
um Well, so on a couple of the meetings,
I had a couple notes that I had written
down. Um which one? So, December 18th
was
actually not Let's see. There was there
was a December 4th meeting and there was
a December 18th meeting. Which one did
you say was incorrect? The Well, it's
just the agenda was wrong. So, the
agenda says the list December 4th tri
board meeting as the agenda item. It
does not list the Wednesday, December
18th meeting. And technically, we
shouldn't take action on anything that's
not on the agenda on this. Okay. Gotcha.
Okay. So, so in my view, we should
probably postpone discussion of the
December meetings. Okay. So, we start
with January 22nd. You could just add it
to the agenda. Well, yeah, we could. Or
just doing board open discussion, I
guess.
But,
yeah, I mean, we're kind of late. We
have not We can't just vote to change it
and correct it right now. And
Well, corrections as noted. Okay. Okay.
Hold on a second. So, at the January
meeting, we already approved the
December 18th regular meeting minutes,
so we do not need to take action on
that. What we do not have in our packet
is the tri board meeting minutes. Now,
you we've had them in front of us
several times. If if somebody wants to
make a motion to approve it, we could.
Um I wasn't there, so I won't, you know,
I won't vote all the same. So, the tri
board meeting minutes was in last
month's packet and the month before that
and the month. Okay. So, I did read it.
I did read it and there was a couple of
things in it
um that need
um addressing clarification or change.
Okay. I would say that we let that go
and then you probably want to make a
note of those. Um
yeah, I have them noted. Would it be
best just to send it in an email or that
that's what I would suggest. Send it to
the email and copy the whole board and
then we can look at it and anybody who
you know if everyone's in agreement we
can we can make the it's an
administrative thing so we're not voting
on it or taking action outside of a
public meeting it's not an issue. Um,
yeah. I mean, again, I was there, but so
I wouldn't I wouldn't know either way,
but I think it would make sense to have
everybody to have the paper in front of
them, the the minutes plus the your
suggested edits.
Yeah. And and I'm not trying to be
flippant, but it was a tri board
meeting. Only one board technically has
to approve it. So,
has anyone thought the board of
selectmen had already approved the tri
board meeting minutes? Um, they did. It
doesn't mean you can't. I thought they
did. I could be wrong. I mean, you know,
there's so many minutes that go through
my, you know, my eyes that I I think it
would still behoove the board of finance
to take a close look at the make sure
the meeting minutes and we agree with
them. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not saying
you can't. I'm just saying if you
decided to punt on that and never do it,
um it probably wouldn't be a foul. Yeah,
got it.
So, um I I think the gist of it is that
we probably want to see Liz's notes and
anybody else who has any comments on the
tri board meeting minutes uh in front of
us and then those of you that were there
can uh you know hopefully we'd kind of
agree that and any changes that we want
to make um and then we can um we can uh
go from there. Uh but I I think we
should probably postpone that till next
meeting if we get a chance to review it.
Are there any minutes that we can
approve tonight? I know I would say
January January 22nd. The meeting
minutes are there. I did I took a quick
skim, but I didn't see any issues there.
Liz, you're raising your hand. Same. Uh
yeah. So on number five, old business
uh on C
uh second
paragraph my notes
um discussed including 2% non-lapsing
account for AES and AES capital
fund in the stiff account.
Board of Education can also move funds
to these accounts into a money market
account to also earn
interest. Okay. What was my note? Um,
oh, should this say the board of ed
would like to move funds to a money
market? No, I think that was something
we suggested that they could consider
doing if I remember correctly. you know,
they wanted to set it put it in the
stiff account and we said we weren't
sure they'd be able to do it. Um, but
one of they had other options. Maybe I
think Bill Bill might suggested I can't
really remember off the top of my head,
but right, but the sentence says Board
of Education can also move funds for
these two accounts into a money market
account. And I'm wondering if it would
be more appropriate to say the board of
ed would like to know would like
to move
funds because it hasn't been determined
that they can actually do that, right?
So I think I think it was more like they
would like to. Yeah. The sentence says I
feel like that was on my I I'd have to
look back at the minutes and I don't
have them open but I think I reported on
it and I thought that I was quoting
something from Cheryl.
Oh, could be. Maybe maybe maybe we could
wait on that one and do a little digging
and find out then. Yeah, I can find the
passage from Cheryl. I thought that we
reported on the stiff account that
Cheryl didn't feel comfortable opening
another stiff account on the top. I
think we can't. Yeah. Yeah. And Right. I
don't see in front of me, but from my
memory, from what Liz is referencing, it
could have been it probably is
documented wrong in the minutes, but
yeah. What I'm Yeah, my point is I think
I think it should say that the board of
ed would like to be able to move funds
to a money market or whatever. Here it
says board of education can also move
funds. Okay. So maybe we we should
postpone action on that those minutes.
Postpone those. Yeah. All right. And
then people can review them and we can
you know I don't know if it's really a
substantive change but we better to get
it accurate. Thanks for looking at that,
Liz.
Yep. Yep. I also reviewed um February
12th and February 19th and I didn't see
anything uh odd. Clearly, you're reading
this a lot closer than I am, so I feel
confident.
So, do you want to make a motion, Liz,
that we approve the February minutes?
Yeah, I'll make a motion to approve uh
February 12th and February 19th um joint
board of finance board of selectman
meeting minutes. I'll second that.
Okay. Do we have any further
discussion? Okay. Um, all those in favor
say I. I. I. Any
opposed? Any
abstensions? Okay. The meeting minutes
for February 12th and February 19th are
approved.
Uh the next one would be February 26
regular uh
meeting. Anybody have any concerns of
those or I did read through the minutes
tonight too just overview, not you know
line by line. I thought that most of
them looked pretty good. You know I know
we've had them on for a couple sessions.
Um, so I'll go ahead and make a motion
to approve the February
26th meeting minutes. Okay. Do we have a
second? Okay. Liz Liz seconds. Sorry. In
a first. Any
discussion? All those in favor say I. I.
I. I. Any
opposed? Any
abstensions? Okay. The meeting minutes
for uh the meeting of February 26 are
approved.
Next, we have the special budget uh
meeting minutes for V Wednesday, March
5th.
And was the 19th a budget meeting as
well? I think, right, we had the Yeah,
there was the 5th, the 19th, and then
the regular meeting on the 26th. I'm
going to go ahead and make a motion to
accept both of those special
budget meeting minutes from February, I
mean, sorry, March 5th and March 19th.
Oops. Scroll too
far. We have a second. I'll second.
Sorry, I was had the thing. Bill. Okay,
Bill did. I'm trying to flip back and
forth between the minutes and the
screen. So, any
discussion? Okay. All those in favor say
I. I. I. Any
opposed? Okay. and no
abstensions. Okay, those two are passed
and that was the 5th and the
19th. And then the last one we have is
the uh regular meeting minutes for March
26th.
I'm going to go ahead and make a motion
to approve those minutes from March 26th
regular board finance meeting. That's
Joanne, right? Okay. Yes. Second,
Bill Rob. Okay. Thanks, Rob. Any
discussion on
those? Okay, hearing none. All those in
favor? I I
opposed. Any abstensions? Looks like
it's unanimous. Thank you very much.
Okay, very good. Knock those out. That's
important. And you know, just I think
we've said this before. Eric's brought
it up, but um you know, if we were to
find an error or something we didn't
like, there's no reason we could not
revisit it. We're just passing it for
the purposes of uh of the record and to
have it posted and available. So, thank
you. Yeah, I do I do have one thing to
say on this. Yeah. Um and and Mark, this
is for you as the chairman. When you
come out of executive session, can you
state and you start the recording? Can
you state on the record when you came
out of ex executive session, when you
restarted the recording? Because the
person just has a blank in the file and
doesn't know. And you're supposed to
state when you go in and when you come
out. That's good. You're right. Good.
Thanks for the reminder. Everybody help
us remember that. It'd be good.
Okay. Okay. Well, that takes us to our
next agenda item, which is our agenda
item eight, which is board open
discussion. This would be a time we
would make a motion to set a special
meeting for uh I believe it's Wednesday,
March 8th, May 7th. May 7th,
too many days. And I so move. So, you
move to special meeting May 7th. at 7
pm. 7 a.m. Second
and on Zoom or in person? I Well, this
is just board of finance meeting to set
the agenda, right? So, I prefer Zoom in
because it's not really it's just us.
Yeah, I I would agree. That's fine with
me. Fine. Okay. So, just to clarify the
motion, it's a virtual meeting. Any
further
discussion? Just note that the meeting
will be cancelled if the uh if the
budget passes a referendum. We should
know that evening. Um and I'll send out
a notice if that's the case. Otherwise,
u we'll have an
agenda. Okay. All those in favor? I I
opposed. Any
abstensions? Okay. It's unanimous. Thank
you very much. Any other board open
discussion?
I'm just going to mention one thing if I
could, Mark. Very brief. I know the
meeting's getting long. No, I sent just
I'm sure some of you saw it or I sent an
email today just documenting that we did
hold an executive session
um or we had asked and appeared on the
agenda as an executive session at the
last board of selectmen meeting on April
14th. So, that did take place. Um the
members that were present were Kim
Personan, Liz Lochek, Bill D. Rogers,
myself, Louise, I believe. Um
were all the board of selectman there? I
didn't see correct. Yes, the board of
selectmen were all there, I think. And
that's the meeting where the new board
of selectmen was present as well. So,
um you can read the overview. I don't I
just wanted to document we held it and
have something in our email referencing
you know that's our official
communication. So I thought it was
important to just kind of document that
for ourselves that we had requested it
for the most part. Um the select men had
wanted us to do it in public. So we did
you know we gave them the the
um the what do I want to say? I'm tired.
I'm thinking um the respect of just
requesting to appear at one of their
meetings and bring up a few items. So,
we thought we'd do it in executive
session, but they asked that most of it
be done in the public. We did. We said
our piece, had the discussions, and
that's it. So, I just wanted to mention
that I sent everyone an email today just
documented that we did that for the
Yeah, I saw that. It was helpful for me
not having been there. So, Right. Right.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. That's all.
gonna be more more coming on some of
those things, but we set our piece.
Anything else before the board?
Okay, hearing none, the next item is
correspondence. I haven't received any
external
correspondence. I do have one and I'll
give it real quick. I did talk to uh get
kind of a snapshot from last year from
the auditor. Um
he he has a very preliminary
uh draft financial statement. Um, but
it's still subject to change because
frankly we're waiting on what's called
OPED, which is our actuarial
uh analysis of uh our healthc care
liabilities and a few other things. Um,
so hopefully that will be taken care of.
That issue is more the holdup is more on
the school side than the town side for
that. Although the the actuary has been
a little bit of a pain to work with this
year. We got a new actuary. Um so the
total difference between revenues and
expenditures on the town side alone was
$46,000. Um
$227,000 of that was our revenues were
over
projection of that over projection. So,
we we brought in more revenue than we
anticipated. Um, the major piece of that
was the change to the stiff account. Um,
the stiff accounted for
$127,000 more revenue than we
anticipated for the year. Um, the second
big one was because the state did pretty
well that
year, we ended up with a municipal
revenue sharing grant of uh just about
$80,000 which we did not anticipate. So
that was the majority of the difference
um in revenues. um overall
taxation combining uh grand list
supplemental grand list back tax
collection and fees. Um we had
$31,000 more than we
anticipated. Um our tax collection
between the grand list and supplemental
list was short $85,000.
But our back co tax collection was way
above average. Um and that's due frankly
to Kate has been a lot more aggressive
um with going after delinquent tax
collectors. Can I just inter I
appreciate this. I feel like this is
such important information. I hate just
hearing it. You know, you are giving it
to us. It's it's good for us to know and
I really, you know, for us to digest it
at the end of a meeting. um we will but
I'd love to see this like in writing or
you know and I'll still continue to
listen but this piece is very important
you know so absolutely and that that's
why I wanted to give it to you long
before Mike is willing to release the
because did this just happen today like
you got a preliminary call on the audit
like today so we couldn't make like a
little memo yeah so I I'm reading off of
the memo and the notes that I took.
Okay. Thank you, Erica. Then I know
forward that to the board. I have no
problem with that. But realize this is
not a finalized audit. Oh, we
understand. I just I wanted to make sure
I understood what I was hearing because
it's so many figures and I'm all into
that, but I'm not I'm not retaining
them. No, thank you. I'll let you
continue as long as we see it in writing
at some point and I know it's not final.
Yeah, you definitely will. At this
stage, usually what happens is now the
uh um the town treasurer will go back to
the audit firm and we'll give them a big
list of questions and say, "Hey, this
doesn't seem right. Why did you
categorize this? Why is this here not
there? Why did you p pull that forward
from a previous year?" Um and then
they'll go back and forth and make sure
they both agree on uh sure what's
actually there. Um so for instance, the
the treasurer gave me like a
$365,000 number for the total difference
between revenue and expenditure. So
they're gonna So they don't totally
agree. Um but that's normal. that
happens every year. Um, so the good news
is revenue is up. We know why revenue is
up. Um, and the year before the
supplemental list plus the grand list
collection was more than anticipated and
this year it was less than anticipated,
but we did a much better job of getting
back taxes. So overall taxation
uh was more than anticipated.
Um, so our revenue forecast, we were
over by 1.8% on total revenue, which as
far as I'm concerned is a pretty good
number. If you back out the stiff
account, that's 08%. Um, so pretty close
agreement between those two of them. Um,
on the expenditure side, total
expenditure on the town side was
$180,000 less than anticipated, but
remember 50,000 of that is contingency.
And when you don't spend contingency, it
just runs back the fund balance. So
really, the number you want to be
thinking about is
$130,000 less than anticipated.
of that 33,000 was the whole employee
benefits category including health care
um you know for that year um
$17,000 was the fact that I did not hire
a replacement admin assistant when Kate
got promoted to be the tax collector I
simply uh assigned that responsibility
to her as a stipen So, that saved the
town considerable money in that. Uh,
$21,000 was our final bill for the
resident trooper was way under uh our
initial allocation.
Um, and honestly, the difference between
their projected bill for us and what we
actually got, they've been over
$25,000 and they've been under
$40,000 on their estimate of what
they're going to charge because they
don't make their final ratio of indirect
cost to salary until some point later in
the year. So that's the basic
variability of that number. So even if
they know the pay rate of the trooper,
it there's a variable there that
applying the overhead that is not known.
Oh, that that makes sense to me. I was
troubled by the fact that we Okay, I
know our favor like I'm throwing a dart
at the wall. Um yeah, you know, but I'm
starting with their projection for what
the cost is going to be. Um okay, it's
just often not correct. Um 10,000 of
that was elections. Um we got a state
grant that covered last year. They did
the same thing that looks like they
might do this year as at the last minute
they uh gave towns a grant to pay for
the cost of some of the early elections.
So I think like
$7,500 of that$10,000 over was that
um 10,000
was the clerk's budget overall was under
um and part of that was we were without
an assistant town clerk for a period of
time. So that was part of it. Um but it
it was cumulative among the whole town
clerk's budget. Um 10,000 of that was
snow removal. As you know, last year was
not a snowy year. Um we had quite a bit
back. Um and 10,000 of that was the rest
of public works budget, but they were
way under on their uh overtime. Um and
that's partly that correlates with a low
snow year. So uh that was the majority
of the reasons why the expenses were
under last year. Um, so the if you use
the
$130,000 number and and ignore
contingency, that means the town's total
budget was about
3.4% under what we budgeted. So that's
the that's the highlevel view of where
we are with last year's uh final. Eric,
I understand what you mean, but we still
budget the 50,000 for contingency,
right? I mean, so it's still part of our
budget. Yeah. And if if Right. I
understand it's going to flow back in,
but we're still
overbudgeted, you know, by that amount.
So, it's unless unless one of these
years you as a board decide to make that
a permanent fund and then fund it and
then as long as nothing gets expended
from that, you don't have to fund it
again because it's sitting out there.
Um, but I will say that uh my closest
year on
expenditures, we used all but like
$9,000 of contingency to keep the town's
budget in the black. So, the closest
I've been was off about 9,000. Wow. Um,
you know, so that's the variability from
year to year. Usually part of the reason
why I take a hard look at this time of
year because with one quarter remaining,
a couple of years I've had to really
shrink expenses
um and not approve stuff uh for the last
quarter to make sure we stayed under.
So, but you know that's just
uh this year you know we are in pretty
good shape and last year at this point
you know we knew we were in the clear
also.
And so to summarize, you're saying that
from the auditor it was about 406
406,000 over and according to Cheryl it
could be 365,000.
Well,
yeah. So Cheryl felt it was So what
they're going to argue about is in some
cases the auditor pulls expenses forward
from a following year
um you know or from a previous year or
says you know that's not really an
expense that's applicable in this year
it's on next year's budget. So there's
always some of that in any given budget
um of them deciding which cate how to
categorize various expenses.
Okay.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay, that was a long correspondence uh
piece but uh it's good information. So
look forward to having that finalized.
Anybody have anything else
correspondence related?
Okay, next item is public speak. I do
not see any members of the public uh in
the uh meeting now.
So I guess we can move on from that. And
the next item is adjournment. Anybody
motion to adjourn?
Didn't give me a chance to even say it.
I'm sorry. Who seconded? I I did unless
someone Liz and Jo were like tied, but
whatever. Yeah. Okay. Joannne's was
first on my I saw. So we'll Joanne
second. Anybody any
discussion? Are we
sure? Okay. All those in favor say I. I.
All those opposed? Any
abstensions? Hearing none. Motion's
passed. Thank you very much everybody.